Okay. Of course, at this time, the Army's
advancement did basically depend on how many
people were in rank at the time. And if someone did
die, then it was time for somebody else to move up
because it was so frozen. It was almost strictly
seniority. Yeah. To further point that out, in
1940, when I went on active duty and joined the 7th
Division, Excuse me, Sixth Division. In those
days, we had Square Division. We had an artillery
regiment.
I was attached to a battery.
The battery commander was Captain Eaps. Mind you
now, this was 1940. He was class of 27 at West Point.
Battery exec, First Lieutenant William O. Darby,
who later became the name of the Darby's Rangers,
the class of 1934. But they were caught in the
appropriations. Our regimental commander, one
of the toughest guys you ever saw, and the job
called for a full colonel. It was a major turn.
I'll give you some ideas.
What did you think of the professional soldiers
that were at A&M at the time? As a whole, I liked
them. We had a few of them. I'm particularly fond of
Lieutenant Jeff Vins, who was not only an
excellent instructor, but he had a sense of humor.
One day he gave a true and false test. And I marked it
true and put in parentheses flip coin. And he
marked it x by and put in parentheses wrong side.
But we had equitation, and
I enjoyed that. In fact, our equitation
instructor had a, well, his wife, the mayor, And it
was a beautiful horse. And I happened to have a
rather good seat on the horse. Among other things,
when I was in high school, we had a Calvary
lieutenant who used to have equitation classes on
Saturdays. And I took that. But this horse, when he
jumped, He'd stumble in the jumps. And it took me
three or four times riding him to find out what the
problem was. Normally, I don't know if you're
familiar with horses or not, but horses have a
right lead. And you take them on the right and they
jump, and their right foot is ahead and they jump.
This horse happened to have a left lead. And when
you went in from the right, the mayor changed and
threw her off. And I just go, you take her in from the
left, where she was on the left lead.
And
I jibbed her down. But we had an excellent stable of
horses. Most of them were just army remasters. And
we'd be on them, and the instructor would say,
they'd be in a circle, and he'd say, by the left
flank, you can see those ears wiggle like that. Oh,
and they'd almost go by themselves. But we jumped
them through jumps. We jumped through them
blindfolded and took jackets
off. Here we go. Did the professional officers,
did they seem a little... I'm
not sure
in those days.
Since World War II, ROTC duty has been part of their
career advancement. I'm not certain in those
days. In many instances, the commandant, who was
chief of PMS&E,
was probably on his last assignment in Norman's
book. He was probably on his last assignment, and I
don't think that is too far from true now.
But we had some characters. Yet they were very
cooperative in many ways.
One year, we had an individual in there that
obviously had one foot short of the other.
And he'd march in ranks, you know, and so forth.
began to get a little suspicious, I think I was a
junior.
So we kept questioning him about, you know, what
classes he would take and where his money came
from. He said he'd been disabled in the state after
the state
was banned. So finally we went down to the
commandant's office and he was just He wasn't even
registered. He was just having a brief room tour.
So I went over to the commandant's office, knocked
on the door, asking if he wanted to take care of it,
if he wanted us to take care of it. He said he'd be
happy if we took care of it. So we just very quietly
went back and told him that when the daylight came,
he better be gone.
But our tactical officers, for the most part,
were able, dedicated people. Not all of them.
Would you compare the quality of A&M grads with
other ROTC graduates at other schools?
As a group, and I'm talking about myself,
group, they were heads and shoulders above all
other ROPC officers. As far as preparation,
how about would you compare them with West Point
grads?
On initial appointment as second lieutenant,
they were ahead of West Point grads. But you must
remember that a West Point graduate's
primary instruction
was duty, honor, country, and an engineering
degree. The Army's system was, and it took me a
number of years to grasp this, but I did.
The education produced the basic officer. We felt
like we knew more than West Point graduates, which
we did because of our hands-on training
at the college. But the Army's theory then, and it
is now, that we can teach you that in basic brain
schools and advanced brain schools and progress,
and I have no quarrel with
it. So I have very great respect for all of the
service academies. They turn out some
poor people as do other institutions, but as a
whole, I heard from some people that as far as
promotion is concerned, there's sort of a West
Point club. We used to refer to it as WPPA, West
Point Protective Association. Do you think there
is such a thing?
Not so much up to Lieutenant Colonel.
up to including lieutenant colonel. Beyond that,
there are fewer colonels. If you look at the
division, for example, there's approximately 26
lieutenant colonels,
six full colonels, and three general officers.
The competition gets rough.
And I have seen it work. Even when I was overseas,
when the Army called me, when I was at the Corps
headquarters, said, I've got a major so-and-so
coming down to Vegas. He said, he's a member of the
WPPA, but he's a nice guy.
But when
you get up to a colonel in general, then you're in
direct competition
with him. I don't think that that applies... quite
as strong in the regular
army. So you think it's more a question of quality
and the competition? I think so. There's still a
little element of it that can't help but be an old
school tie. Yeah. Is there a Texas A&M Protective
Association? Not that I know of, but they
immediately recognized
each other. But one thing about the West Point
graduate, particularly depending upon his
ability and his course of action, one of the finest
jobs that you could possibly have is a young
lieutenant as an aide to a general officer.
They seem to get those jobs. Is that what you're
saying? You get to know a lot of people. Sometimes
if you really get in a sticky situation, you can
maybe call for some help from somebody that knows
you. You're not just a face. But the Army has a
rather rigid society, as does the university.
For example, an assistant professor's wife
wouldn't dare call the dean's wife by her first
name. The military works the same way, and I think
it's necessary. But I have no quarrel with service
captains. But I have found that Texas A&M
University graduates
make fine officers, not in every case. When
you graduated from A&M, did you know what you
wanted to do? Yes, sir. What was that that you
wanted to do? Have you ever heard of the Thomason
Act? Yeah, I have heard of the Thomason Act. Do you
know any background on it? Yeah.
Did you want to become a regular officer under the
Thomason Act? The Thomason Act,
if I may divert, there was a congressman named
Ewing Thomason who later became a federal
district judge in El Paso. His son, Bill Thomason,
lives in Bryan. He's retired now. He's an
attorney. But he owned the John Deere business for
many years. But he introduced a bill in Congress
called, we refer to it as the Tonkin Act, in which
case 1,000 reserve officers would be put on active
duty for a year. At the end of that time, 50 of them
would be
chosen for regular commissions. I applied for
that. You're a senior here at A&M? Yes. My chief of
section taught me how to do it.
I'm not certain Fireside was different, though.
And I'm sure he felt like he may have been just in a
down period there, or his career wasn't going real
well. But I turned it down. And then the next year, I
reapplied. And
believe it or not, I didn't pass the physical.
due to an unfortunate set of circumstances.
I was living in Fort Worth, and I drove up Fort Sill,
Oklahoma, and got the doctor off the golf course.
And he reported me as unstable blood pressure,
which doesn't mean anything, and pigmented nevi,
which is...
some of these spots
here. Of course, they had a lot of people to select
from. I went down to Fort Sam Houston, Texas. This
colonel in charge right away let me know that Major
Brown was a competent doctor. And I said, sir, I
didn't come down here to run Major Brown down. I
came down to try to get in the Army. So they ended up
with me laying naked on a table, my arm plunged in
ice water to here, taking the blood pressure.
And then they discussed this multiple pigmented
nevi. And I could hear one say, well, Jack will be
here in a minute. We'll see what he says, who I
assume was a dermatologist. So this officer
strolls in with a white jacket on, looks at one
here. Walked all the way around, got to the door,
and turned around and said, not a damn thing. But
they couldn't
get over it. Unstable blood pressure. Was it true?
I mean, every time they take your blood pressure,
was
it different? Apparently so. So they wouldn't let
you in? They had a number of options for them. So
what did you decide to do? Find a job. See, when I got
here, I went to work for Oliver Farm Equipment
Company in the Dallas range. The jobs weren't
easy. No, no. What were you doing?
A little bit of everything. I was
trying to design a system of making the plow go up
and down
automatically on the tractor.
The art of hydraulics needed World War II to bring
it along.
The guy that had been working on it was doing it in
the spring. I could never
prove it. I finally ended up, I guess you'd say, in
the accounting department. But to show you how
tough times were, I went to work $85 a month. And
that 30 days cut everybody in the branch
10%. And after a year,
I left them. I had worked over in Fort Worth in one of
the farm stokers.
After a year, I left them and came back down here and
went to the department head and interviewed and
went to work with Wallace Black in Dallas.
And I stayed with them until That was 37. They were
in 1940. So you went active. No, you went active in
1941. Well, I went active in 1941. I went on active
duty in 1940. But, see, I loved the engineering
department. I was up there about nine months. At
that time, they had a program, which they had
stopped. of taking engineers and sending them to
Oil City, Pennsylvania for a year to go through the
various departments where they're
manufactured. They had moved their main office to
Dallas a few years before that. Oil Supply Company
is a wholly owned subsidiary of U.S. Steel, or was.
I enjoyed the engineering drafting department.
Our chief engineer, Gus Meyer, and our chief
craftsman, Hans Vogelgesang, were both born,
raised, and university educated in Germany.
Hans and I became rather close friends, and I loved
working there. Then they sent me to the field as a
service
And that's where I met my wife. I was stationed in
Graham, Texas. And I went through the, I guess,
West Wichita Hall, what they call the KMA. And
then they transferred me to Illinois. And that was
pure hell. Why?
It was another book. We were living in southern
Illinois.
The winters were bitter and the summers were
terribly hot.
I've been stuck six and seven times in one day. I
started at, oh well, $100 a month, which wasn't too
bad. When I went to Field and Graham, I got all the
way up to $115 a month. When I transferred to
Illinois, I was making $135 a month.
The conditions were terrible,
and the pay was poor. I was living in a boon town. I
was paying $35 a month rent. And living conditions
were poor, and I was married and everything else.
So finally, in 1940, I just went in to the district
manager. I made a noise and told him. I was getting a
30-day notice. And he immediately said, you're
going to work with another supply company.
Because they had a little deed. If I had quit them
and gone to work for, say, Republic Supply
Company, all they had to do is pick up the phone and
tell them, call them, and say, hey, the whole
hostel left us to go to work for you. And they'd say,
that's enough. We'll take care of
it. I told them no. I was going back to Texas. Went by
Fort Worth, the former store man in Wichita Falls,
where we were doing a quarter million dollars a
month, big money in those days. the district
manager. And he said, go on over to Dallas and tell
them you want to go to work at the bottom hole
department. I said, I don't know anything about
bottom hole work. He said, I'll teach you all you
need to know. I said, no. I said, as far as I'm
concerned, they're a bunch of so-and-sos, and I'm
going to take them. I came back here and went, no. So
did you work for your uncle now? No.
A man by the name of O.B. Donahue had worked for my
father now. He started to use carpenters. And a few
months later, Jutte came by
and wanted to meet Jutte. But
An interesting thing, when I moved to Illinois, I
transferred my reserve affiliation from San
Antonio to St. Louis.
All the time it was just paper outfit. Even when I
was in Texas, I would take the paper outfit. So you
never did any training from 1936 until 1940,
really? Extremely enough, I did.
Where I lived in Salem, Illinois, they had an
infantry company of the 33rd Illinois National
Guard. I went out to see the company commander, and
he said he didn't need any officers. So I said, it
would be all right if I just take my insignia off and
just show up and drill with you. He said, yeah, I'll
be fine. So they'd issue me a rifle, you know. We'd
be at formation, port on. They'd call somebody
else's name, and I'd put my rifle down. I drove in,
no pay, no recognition.
Why'd you decide to do that? Keep my hand in
there. In 1940, you went active for a couple of
weeks. Oh, 30 days. The reason I did that, number
one, was in order to get promoted to first
lieutenant. I was ordered to Camp Jackson, South
Carolina, and I was attached to the 6th Division.
And we stayed there a week, a week and a half, and we
moved to Fort Benning, Georgia. What I wasn't
aware of, I was the second lieutenant, was that
this was the pre-1940 Louisiana
maneuvers. And we marched around in the red clay of
Georgia in the rain. And some interesting
highlights occurred. The 1940
maneuvers, as far as I've ever been able to find
out, were a fiasco in Louisiana that somehow both
forces decided they were opposing overwhelming
forces.
And as a result, they pulled so far back that they
called it off. But
we had a bunch of old regular army people there. One
of the things that I always enjoyed was a
regimental commander.
All of his messengers were out. His flags were
misplaced. His telephone lines were cut, and he
had an old hand-winding radio. He radioed
division headquarters and completely out of
communication.
So when I played that tour duty, I came from behind.
How did the older actor officers get along with a
30-day officer? Is there any friction? Not
really.
They tolerate this, I'm sure, because we knew
little or nothing. At that particular time in
Battery C,
We had, in addition to two or three of us, we had an
even dozen pilots attached to us. Randolph Field
was in the air academy where all the pilot training
took place. And somebody got the brilliant idea,
as they were wanting to do, that in order for a pilot
to support the ground troops, he needs to know how
they lead. So that graduating class, and it was one
that somebody got married every 30 minutes to the
chapel. So they attached them to these various
units that were going to be in Louisiana. I might
add as an aside, they hated every
penny done. We had a large battery mess there. But
Captain Eaps and Lieutenant Darby were very
tolerant of us. They didn't pay much attention to
us because they had so many other things to share.
But I was made a forward observer, which I hadn't
the faintest idea what a forward observer did. I
learned a lot from the sergeants. which you can if
you listen to them. And I completed that Thursday
tour of Goodyear. And then you were promoted after
that to first lieutenant.
Did you want to, at that point, did you want to stay
in the service? Did you want to come back in your
automobile? I meant to tell you something. I'm not
sure what I wanted to do then. In 1940, I was knocked
down. really aware of the international
situation.
I've often wondered had I acted on it at the
foresight. But St. Louis Reserve Headquarters
started sending me letters about once every 30
days requesting that I transfer to the Army Air and
go on immediate active duty as a plant inspector,
had I been aware of what the circumstances were.
See, they were getting called to guard, but I
wasn't aware of that. I was in rather an isolated
world.
I probably would have taken it. Where it had led, I
don't know. In 1941, what prompted me, they came
out with what they call this year's active duty.
And I talked to my partner, and we agreed I'd go
ahead and get it off. So I went on duty April 15,
1941. And my orders read that I'd be returned to my
home of record by 15 April, 1941.
You returned in 1946. That's right. It's strange
how the military works. Well, sometime during
that year, I got a notice from regimental
headquarters asking to volunteer for three, six,
nine, or 12 months of digital service. I put a zero
and sent it in. Why is that? Did you want to stand?
Well, I had a business going. There wasn't any real
evidence
of war at the business school. And some, what I
would say, sizable investment at the time. So I got
called into the Adjutant's office, and he said,
you can't do that. So I think I selected six months.
Of course, it all went by the board in December 7.
But that was the original. And
of course, I went down to the San Antonio Reserve
Headquarters and they said, well, we'll have to
check the file. They opened it up. Of course, there
wasn't anything in it. I got my order a few days
later. So where was your first active duty
station, 30th Field Artillery 1941? Well, the
first active duty station was Fort Art,
California. 7th Division Artillery School that
they formed.
Because all of us were assigned to the 26th Field
Artillery Brigade. And the 7th Division was
instructed to set up this school to train these new
coming officers.
And at that time, they had a 155 howitzer battalion
and three historic horse-drawn light
battalions, 74th, 75th, and 76th Real Artillery,
who had been in the Meuse-Argonne Forest.
So they had brown horse batteries, black horse
batteries.
This wasn't a year. No, this was about six weeks.
Just shortly thereafter. And
then we went down to King Proverbs to form the 26th
Field Artillery Brigade, which I was attached. My
initial assignment, I was TDY at 7th Division
Artillery My initial assignment was to the 155 Gun
Regiment. The brigade was two 155 Howard's
Regiments and one 155 Gun Regiment. And they were
formed the Gun Regiment. So I was reassigned to the
30th Field Artillery Regiment, one of the 155 Gun
Regiments, Howard's Regiment. No. I've never
fired a round of artillery in anger in my life. I was
reassigned as battery exec of the anti-tank
battery.
And then in after December the 7th when all hell
broke loose on the West Coast.
In fact,
one of the better things to do, we rushed up to San
Jose State and Fort Ord and assembled four
75-millimeter
guns. Well, I'm not sure they knew what it was for.
But Our anti-tank battery had to train those. Two
of those guns had French sights and two American
sights. So when you laid the battery, you'd say,
gun number one, deflection 180. Gun number two,
deflection 183. Gun number three, plateau 10,
drum 10. Gun number four, plateau 10, drum 16.
But our first job, two days after that, was to guard
Moffett Field against a parachute attack. There
was a lot of fear of the Japanese who were going to
invade out on the west coast. Well, you know, some
of them surfaced in Shelter Beach out there. But
after things settled down a little bit, oh, it was
horrible, really. They pulled us. out all the
anti-tank batteries. And from it, we formed the
826th Tank Star Battalion.
And an interesting sidelight, General Jim
Hannigan, who used to be Dean of Student Affairs,
he was a battery exec, and I was S-4.
I went on active duty, and April 15th, 41, and got
promoted to captain in February of 42. And Jim
Hannigan and Doris White and I, we've known 35
years. But... Were you still on the California in
February of 42? Mm-hmm. But during February 1942,
they started to round up the Japanese Americans
out there and send them to relocation centers. Did
you have anything to do with that? No, we had some in
and out. We had a sergeant who was transferred out.
Now, he was in the military, so I think he went to
that Japanese regiment. I never did know what it
was. 414, yeah. But we had nothing to do with that.
We had our own
job to do because we were essentially combat
units. And we formed the 826th Tank Squadron at
that point. And shortly thereafter, we pulled out
of Camp Roberts and went down the march It wasn't
known as March Air Force Base now. It was March
Field then. And the entire battalion at the guard
post. And I was officer of the day for 48 hours every
14 days. I started out as F-4 and then I became
company commander. 48 hours straight? Yes, sir.
We're supposed to stay up? I mean, were they not?
No, no. No, you were officer today for 48 hours.
No, you got some sleep. But the regulations then,
you had to inspect the guard at periodic
intervals. And the regulations stated then, I
think it had been slightly changed now, slightly
altered. Between midnight and daylight, you had
to inspect it. And off the Apache Mountains, it was
cold. I put on long underwear and short coat and
climbed in that Jeep because it took a 17-mile ride
to make off the coast. And
of course, they were absolutely frightened to
death. See, once the planes hit the coast, they
could see Marchville.
And I forget what was there. Sure enough, the alert
was a blue alert. They even blew a blue alert one
night. It was false,
but it was hard.
And then on top of it, we got in 150 recruits, okay,
direct from the river station. So they were raw
recruits that you had to train? Yes, sir. I had to
take one of my... company officers and put him in
charge of it. And
we trained them for six weeks. But
they came right direct from the railroad station.
And we managed. That was hard duty there. What kind
of equipment did you have as a tank destroyer?
How were you going to destroy the tanks? Well, it
was with a tank destroyer. But first of all, I think
we had some anti-tank guns. But see, we went from
there. My sequence is correct. back to Camp
Roberts.
Then from Camp Roberts, we went to Fort Hood,
Texas.
And Fort Hood was a foundation stone building, so
we were out at the boondocks and the air land
passes. I remember a general came to visit us one
day. And he stood before our battalion and said he
was going to take guns and guns to win this war. And I
could hear a soft little voice say, we're going to
take a whole lot of guns from you guys. So you were
short on equipment? Very short. And it was
somebody's theory that a tank destroyer would
destroy tanks. like a tank, but an open turret. And
we trained and trained and trained as that. And we
went to the Moabe Desert and went on summer
maneuvers all over the desert, which was kind of
fun, really. You didn't get overseas until 1944.
Were you eager to get overseas as a unit? You were
basically trained that for three years.
Yes and no.
Because we trained and trained. I went to advanced
tank patrol school
in Fort Hood. And then the Army discovered that
They sent a few tank destroyers to Europe. Then the
Army discovered that the best tank destroyer was
another tank.
So we were converted into the 826th Amphibious
Tractor Battalion. And why tractor? Sir? Why
tractor? Well, it's an entirely different
mission. These were known as amphibious
tractors, same as which Marines landed in
Guadalcanal. And they needed some amphibious
tractor battalions. So after all that work and
that, then we went to Fort Ord, California for
amphibious training.
And we went overseas.
Now, did you have an opinion on where you'd rather
fight, either in Europe or in the Pacific? I guess
I'm a soldier. I go where I'm told to go. In
retrospect, I think I'd rather have fought in
Europe, a civilized country. By the same token,
I'm alive, and I might have
been dead. Those South Pacific islands are not
very attractive. And I was in quite a few of them.
And our first hint of civilization
Well, let's continue the story then. You went over
in September of 1944. That was your first overseas
tour. Where'd they send you? The unit went ahead of
me. I stayed back in San Francisco. Why? To get the
equipment. Oh, okay. I stayed back there for about
30 days. It was a nice tour. In fact, they were
paying me $300 a month. ration quarters to stay
back. I loaded with money. I'd make an $800 a month
major. And see, I was a tax executive. And so I
joined them in the Admiralty Islands, which
they had two islands,
Los Negros and Those
islands are in Seattle Harbor. Have you ever heard
of Seattle Harbor? No. It's a huge, huge harbor. It
was supposed to have been discovered by the German
raider in World War I, Captain Seattle. You
couldn't really put the whole city fleet in there
until that wouldn't turn around. And it was a
major... installation of the Navy. In fact, they
brought in a floating